Intermittent streams, characterised by flow cessation, are becoming more common due to anthropogenic global climate-warming. The main aim of the present study was to test methods for recognition of streams' hydrological regimes by means of macroinvertebrate communities in an Austrian biogeographic region, Bioregion 14 – Grazer Basin and Grabenland. Another aim was to extend autecological information on species inhabiting intermittent streams. Benthic macroinvertebrates of eight least-impacted stream sites with different hydrological regimes (two perennial, three intermittent which retain remnant pools, three intermittent which dry completely) were collected multiple times during spring and early summer 2019. Terrestrial adult stages of mayflies, stoneflies and caddisflies were captured to document flight periods. Macroinvertebrate community structure was shown to be significantly different between perennial and intermittent sites. Indicator taxa were defined for all hydrological regime types. Several macroinvertebrate-based methods which use biological taxa traits were shown to act as hydrological regime discriminators. The Biodrought index, among international indices tested, enabled most accurate identification of the hydrological type. It seems to be suitable for use in the field of applied stream assessment. Larvae of Ironoquia dubia (Trichoptera: Limnephilidae) were shown to be terrestrial and to aestivate buried in the bank substrate as adaption to streambed drying. Additionally, life-history traits and distribution of other poorly studied intermittent stream inhabitants, e.g. Chaetopteryx rugulosa, Lithax obscurus (Trichoptera), Zwicknia spp. (Plecoptera), Siphlonurus armatus (Ephemeroptera) are described. Biological traits provide insight into the adaption of macroinvertebrate communities to intermittent flow. The applicability of the methods tested to recognise hydrological stream types should be verified in additional streams and beyond the study area in future investigations. The analysis of benthic macroinvertebrates generally constitutes an effective way to show responses of biotic communities to intermittent flow.