Intermittent rivers and ephemeral streams (IRES) compose the majority of draining networks on Earth, supporting a unique fraction of biodiversity. Despite their high ecological value, IRES are increasingly threatened by global change and require appropriate biomonitoring and restoration tools. However, indices and indicators used in routine biomonitoring programs are often confounded by drying effects. This occurs because most pollution-sensitive taxa are lost over drying gradients, limiting the utility of current biomonitoring tools in IRES. To address this challenge, there is a need to evaluate which taxa should be used to calculate biomonitoring metrics and indicators over the different portions of the drying gradient. Here, using high-resolution drying data from 33 unpolluted streams, we explored the drying preferences of macroinvertebrates to identify their potential as biomonitoring indicators in IRES. To do this, we characterized macroinvertebrate drying niches and identified those with drying resistance and sensitivity preferences. Next, we evaluated the capacity of functional traits to predict drying specialization and affinity. Finally, to identify potential biomonitoring metrics and indicators for IRES, we evaluated how drying influenced the density, relative abundance and richness of taxa in drying-sensitive and drying-resistant niches. Our results identified three macroinvertebrate groups with drying-resistant niches (partly tolerant, generalist and specialist taxa) and one group of drying-sensitive taxa. We also found that functional traits had a limited capacity to represent differences in drying niches, with shredding trophic preferences and body size showing the strongest correlations. In addition, we observed that the density, relative abundance and richness of drying-resistant taxa were less influenced by drying intensity than those of drying-sensitive taxa. Finally, we found that some pollution-sensitive taxa with partial (e.g., Lepidostoma), moderate (e.g., Corduliidae) or high drying tolerance (e.g., Nemoura) can serve as potential indicators in IRES. Taken together, our results demonstrate that characterizing drying niches can be a useful strategy for developing biomonitoring tools in IRES and for highlighting the limitations of taxonomic and trait-based approaches.