Anthropogenic Threats to Intermittent Rivers and Ephemeral Streams

Intermittent rivers and ephemeral streams (IRES) worldwide face significant anthropogenic threats resulting from alterations in natural flow regimes, changes in geomorphological features, and degraded water quality. These changes may favor invasion by alien species, a major ecological problem in IRES. Anthropogenic threats in IRES often exceed the thresholds of native species' adaptations and can change community structure and ecological processes, with impacts that may cascade to downstream waterbodies and adjacent riparian wetlands.

IRES are subject to many of the same human-induced threats as perennial rivers and streams, but with far less legal protection. Most IRES have low societal value assigned to their ecological attributes and ecosystem services, making them probably under greater threat of degradation than perennial systems. They can serve as sites for trash dumping, sediment dredging, waste water disposal, and road traffic. The natural variability of IRES flow regimes and hydrological phases, which can result in extended and unpredictable periods of zero flow, means that anthropogenic activities and changes to hydrology may be wrongly dismissed as unproblematic.

Anthropogenic threats to IRES are broadly classified into three categories: hydrological alterations (including withdrawals or additions of water that change inundation durations and the dynamic interplay of aquatic versus terrestrial habitat); physical and chemical alterations (including sedimentation, sediment mining, and water pollution that degrade aquatic and terrestrial habitats); and biological alterations (particularly the introduction or invasion of species that threaten native communities). Hydrology, geomorphology, and water quality impacts often occur concurrently (e.g., from mining activities) and result in multiple stressors in IRES, which can increase their vulnerability to alien species. IRES are under-appreciated in terms of the ecosystem services they provide, resulting in a lack of biological monitoring systems which consequently hinders effective management strategies.
