Title: Flight periods and life history strategies of caddisflies in temporary and permanent woodland brooks in the Lower Rhine area (Germany)

Authors: University of Essen, Institute of Ecology, Department of Hydrobiology; and Staatliches Umweltamt Herten

Source: Proceedings of the 8th International Symposium on Trichoptera, 1997, pages 425-433, Ohio Biological Survey

Abstract: A total of 71 species of caddisflies was collected during a 3-year-study by light traps and larval samples from 52 mostly unpolluted brooks in the Lower Rhine area (30-70 m a.s.l.). Almost half of the streams run dry in summer for several months because of the specific geological and hydrological conditions. Caddisflies of these temporary brooks show several adaptations associated with colonization of such habitats which are reflected, for example, in the flight periods: a short flight period in early spring followed by a larval quiescence in summer or an extended flight period from spring into autumn with diapausing adults are typical for 73% of species which occur primarily in temporary brooks. Permanent streams are colonized by species which have their flight periods in summer or in autumn without diapausing adults (96%). Autecological studies of the rare phryganeid species Oligostomis reticulata L. in temporary brooks showed a new type of life cycle with a long larval quiescence in the dry stream bed.

Study Area: The sand flats of the Lower Rhine (30-70 m a.s.l.) are situated on the eastern side of the Rhine, between the northwestern margin of the conurbation Ruhrgebiet and the Dutch border (total area about 570 km2). A layer of poor glacial and fluviatil sands with gravels covering a thick stratum of clay preserved the landscape from intensive agricultural land use and settlement. Therefore nearly half of the sand flats are still covered by forests, most of the streams follow their natural bed and are accompanied by alder (Alnus glutinosa). The hydrological conditions in combination with the evapotranspiration are responsible for the drying out of numerous streams during summer (June to October).
