Fertilization and intensive farming techniques are often inevitable for sustaining the yield nowadays, resulting in a soil degradation, the leaching of nutrients form the unsaturated zone and the pollution and eutrophication of groundwater and surface waters. The vadose zone affects many hydrological processes surrounding the soil surface, and the movement of water and dissolved nutrients in the unsaturated zone is not always easy to measure and calculate. As there are only a few ways to measure these fluxes, most of them being very time-consuming and expensive, simulating these fluxes with available measured data is a promising alternative. In the course of this thesis, a model was set up with the modelling environment HYDRUS-1D for an agriculturally used field site in Gabersdorf, in southern Styria, that is covered by different winter cover crop compositions to simulate the water flow and the nitrate-nitrogen (NO3--N) transport in the vadose zone. At the field site, situated in the district Leibnitz that was affected by agriculturally induced groundwater pollution in the last three decades, soil samples were taken in the course of 9 months from August 2017 to May 2018 and were analysed for their water and mineralized nitrogen (Nmin) content, prior to this study. The measured data was used for the calibration and validation of the HYDRUS-model that was set up for the time period from 3rd of August 2017 to the 16th of April 2018. The simulated water contents matched the measured ones quite well, with an overall coefficient of determination R² of 0.66 and a root-mean-square error (RMSE) of 2.68. The simulated NO3--N concentrations also showed rather low errors with a R² of 0.62 and a RMSE of 2.87. The amount of NO3--N leached during five months of the simulation period was estimated from the water flux and the NO3--N concentration at the bottom of the soil profile. The HYDRUS-model was further evaluated by simulating the NO3--N concentration during a heavy precipitation event that took place on the evening of the 16th of April 2018. A comparison of the simulated values with the measured water contents and NO3--N concentrations on the 2nd of May 2018 revealed a good fit of the model, but also showed that the decrease of the NO3--N concentration in all plots and all soil depths and thus the displacement capacity of the heavy precipitation was underestimated by the HYDRUS-model.