HYDROMORPHOLOGISCHE LEITBILDER: FLIESSGEWÄSSERTYPISIERUNG IN ÖSTERREICH
Band 1: Einführung, Definitionen und Parameter
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY / PREFACE

Although Austria is a small country, our streams and rivers present an enormous diversity of forms – from small meadow streams to the broad Danube, from wild gorges to valley-filling braided river sections, from rushing torrents in the Alps to sluggishly flowing lowland rivers in the east.

This diversity also demands different standards for assessing ecological condition and – if required – for implementing improvement measures. What constitutes a natural bank formation in a gorge stream, for example, can be – if artificially caused – a catastrophe for the fauna and flora in another water body.

By adapting the Austrian Water Rights Act to the requirements of the EU Water Framework Directive, this circumstance has been taken into account. The type-specific approach has become an essential principle in water management: in ecological assessment methods, in planning and implementation of measures, and in granting permits for water use.

The prerequisite for this is a scientifically sound classification of all domestic water bodies into water types that can be distinguished from one another and whose differences are also reflected in the fauna and flora that inhabit them.

The diversity of Austrian water landscapes was documented with images and published in 2007 in the form of an interactive DVD.

The contents of this DVD are now to be made available – in updated form – also as a reference work. The present 4 volumes contain a general introduction to water typology as well as detailed descriptions of individual water types.

They serve as guidance in assessing the hydromorphological condition according to the Quality Objectives Regulation for Ecology of Surface Water Bodies (BGBl. II No. 99/2010) and serve as a working basis for other water management and nature conservation work.

---
PUBLICATION INFORMATION:
Authors: DI Reinhard Wimmer, Dr. Harald Wintersberger, DI Günter A. Parthl
Published: February 2012
Publisher: Bundesministerium für Land- und Forstwirtschaft, Umwelt und Wasserwirtschaft (Austrian Federal Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Environment and Water Management)
