INDUSTRIALIZED RIVERINE LANDSCAPES - RESEARCH FRAMEWORK
University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna (BOKU)

INTRODUCTION - THE COUPLED SOCIO-ECOHYDROLOGICAL EVOLUTION OF RIVERS

Since the onset of the Anthropocene, landscapes and river systems have undergone dramatic, worldwide transformation. This transformation was driven by a shift from an agrarian (solar-energy-based) to an industrialized (fossil-fuel-based) socio-metabolic regime with impacts on the availability and quality of water and the functioning of aquatic ecosystems. Consequently, almost all river systems can no longer be considered as natural systems. Dynamic, complex interactions and feedback mechanisms between natural and social systems characterise today's rivers and their catchments, they have been transformed into IRL – Industrialized Riverine Landscapes.

Awareness of these interactions has increased remarkably; the initiative of the hydrological community announcing the Scientific Decade of Panta Rhei 2013-2022 is one case in point. Concepts and research questions to target linkages of hydrological and societal aspects were developed, addressing urgent unsolved problems. There is a strong need to go beyond social-hydrological interactions by integrating socioeconomic, ecological, and hydrological perspectives on an equal footing in a novel research framework.

DOCTORAL PROGRAMME OVERVIEW

Based on an interdisciplinary research-driven education, this Doctoral School studies IRLs as coupled socio-ecohydrological systems (SEHS), asking how they respond to current and future environmental, social, cultural, and economic drivers of change, including climate, demographic, and land-use change. This Doctoral School trains a new generation of experts and provides scientific evidence for sound adaptive management supporting alternative transformation pathways of IRL into self-sustaining and more resilient systems. This Doctoral School embodies the visions of the University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna (BOKU), as a leading university for sustainability in Europe.

CHALLENGES FOR SCIENCE AND SOCIETY DEMANDING INTEGRATED APPROACHES

The industrialization of riverine landscapes has altered aquatic ecosystems and created complex interactions with societal activities, leading to compound pressures from which aquatic systems can only slowly (or never) recover, and which impair the provision of services from aquatic ecosystems. These pressures can have severe impacts and can lead to: loss of biodiversity, soil sealment by settlements and infrastructure, deterioration of water quality, and imbalances in water security and sediment dynamics in rivers and their catchments worldwide.

Fossil-fuel driven industrialization has led to an unfolding climate crisis, accompanied by more extreme events of floods and droughts, rapid urbanisation and infrastructure development, and overexploitation of natural resources. This is challenging the water-energy-food nexus which in turn impairs the ecological and chemical status of aquatic ecosystems. This transformation into IRL decreased rivers' self-purification capacity, provision of ecosystem services, and biodiversity refuge, which in turn increases the vulnerability of ecological as well as socio-economic systems and thus puts current and future generations at risk.

Many of these human-induced pressures on the environment are persistent, highly complex, sometimes intertwined, often global, and with delayed responses, with extensive spatial and temporal distance between cause and effect, usually involving numerous conflicting stakeholders. IRLs not only need to be adapted to current and future challenges but also require transformation into more resilient and self-sustaining systems.

PROGRAMME COORDINATOR
Univ. Prof. Thomas Hein
Department of Water, Atmosphere and Environment
Institute of Hydrobiology and Aquatic Ecosystem Management
Gregor-Mendel-Straße 33, 1180 Vienna, Austria
