A model of the world's rivers and streams has been developed to predict which of these watercourses flow all year round and which go dry. The analysis shows that rivers and streams that run dry are ubiquitous throughout the world.

The flowing waters of surface rivers and streams efficiently transport sediment, organic material and nutrients, among other things, from hillsides and overland areas to downstream lakes, reservoirs and the ocean. Along the way, rivers and streams provide important resources for our communities and support rich, complex ecosystems. Non-perennial streams, which do not flow year-round, are crucial in this context. However, because non-perennial streams are less reliable sources of surface water than perennial ones, they are less-well studied than their perennial counterparts.

A much-needed estimate of the total proportion of the world's stream network, by length, that is non-perennial shows that most fall into this category. Data combined from sites around the world with information describing the hydrology, climate, physical geography and land cover were used to model the probability that water does not flow for at least one day per year. These predictions expanded to all stream segments recorded in a global stream-network database reveal that 51–60% of the world's streams do not flow for at least one day per year, and that 44–53% of global stream length is dry for at least one month (about 30 days) each year. Non-perennial streams occur in all climates and biomes on every continent. In hot, dry regions—which represent 10% of the global landmass—95% of the stream network runs dry each year. Astonishingly, even segments of major rivers, such as the Niger River in West Africa, are predicted to dry up in these arid regions.

The vast prevalence of non-perennial streams in such locations highlights how even streams that do not flow continuously substantially affect water availability and water quality. The results emphasize the need for more-detailed maps of perennial and non-perennial flows at regional and local scales, and for further studies of how non-perennial streams affect overall water availability and quality.

Small headwater streams (those that have no tributaries) make up 70–80% of stream length worldwide. Even in the wettest regions, such as the Amazon River basin and portions of central Africa and southeast Asia, up to 35% of these headwater streams stop flowing at some point in the year.

The findings highlight the need for a fundamental change in river and stream science and management, in which non-perennial streams have been largely overlooked. In arid regions, the predominance of non-perennial streams might be a major driver of water availability and quality. A global benchmark of the prevalence of perennial and non-perennial streams is crucial for evaluating the effects of future changes in their distribution associated with climate and land-use change. Regional and local models of streams are needed, as well as better data for headwaters and non-perennial portions of the stream network, to further increase the value of global models.