The master thesis deals with the primary colonization of two man-made experimental channels in Lunz am See, Lower Austria by benthic invertebrates. These channels were created to investigate the effects of pulse-release on aquatic organisms. Water is supplied directly from the lake Lunzer See via two pipelines and flow through the channels started on the 9th of September 2011. Macrozoobenthos-sampling was conducted monthly until the 10th of April 2012 using a box-sampler. During the sampling period the channels were subject to repeated pulse-releases, which occurred more often in the orographically right channel. Moreover, the channels were stocked with young fish several times, which were removed by electro-fishing after pulse-release experiments.

During the first three months only few macrozoobenthic specimens were found in the samples. The period from December until March is characterized by growth of total individual biomass (average biomass per specimen) and abundance of a few taxa. Abundance continued growing from March until the end of the study period, but biomass declined. All samples from the channels showed explicitly lower abundance and biomass than the reference samples from the Unterer Lunzer Seebach which parallels the channels. However, development of colonization was very similar in both channels. Chironomids dominated the fauna in the experimental channels. These and the stonefly genera Nemoura/Nemurella were the only taxa reaching abundances similar to those in the Seebach by the end of the study period. Identification of Chironomid larvae of the last sampling date showed distinct dominance of several species of the genus Diamesa. This study showed that colonization through oviposition most probably was the quantitatively most important path for colonization and that pioneer taxa show characteristic traits which support this way of colonization. Drift, upstream migration and colonization from the sediment are of minor importance in this particular case. Dominance of Diamesa spp. could either be a result of limitation in sources of colonists or disturbances in the channels.