Wetland ecosystems (including lakes, rivers, marshes, and coastal regions to a depth of 6 meters at low tide) cover more than 1,280 million hectares, an area 33% larger than the United States and 50% larger than Brazil. More than 50% of specific types of wetlands in parts of North America, Europe, Australia, and New Zealand were destroyed during the twentieth century, and many others in many parts of the world were degraded.

Wetlands deliver a wide range of ecosystem services that contribute to human well-being, including fish and fiber, water supply, water purification, climate regulation, flood regulation, coastal protection, recreational opportunities, and tourism. When both marketed and nonmarketed economic benefits are included, the total economic value of unconverted wetlands is often greater than that of converted wetlands.

The degradation and loss of wetlands is more rapid than that of other ecosystems. Similarly, the status of both freshwater and coastal wetland species is deteriorating faster than those of other ecosystems. The primary indirect drivers of degradation and loss have been population growth and increasing economic development. Direct drivers include infrastructure development, land conversion, water withdrawal, eutrophication and pollution, overharvesting and overexploitation, and the introduction of invasive alien species.

Global climate change is expected to exacerbate the loss and degradation of many wetlands and the loss or decline of their species and to increase the incidence of vector-borne and waterborne diseases in many regions. Excessive nutrient loading is expected to become a growing threat to rivers, lakes, marshes, coastal zones, and coral reefs. Growing pressures from multiple direct drivers increase the likelihood of potentially abrupt changes in wetland ecosystems, which can be large in magnitude and difficult, expensive, or impossible to reverse.

The projected continued loss and degradation of wetlands will reduce the capacity of wetlands to mitigate impacts and result in further reduction in human well-being, especially for poorer people in lower-income countries. At the same time, demand for many of these services such as denitrification and flood and storm protection will increase.

Physical and economic water scarcity and limited or reduced access to water are major challenges facing society and key factors limiting economic development in many countries. However, many water resource developments undertaken to increase access to water have not given adequate consideration to harmful trade-offs with other services provided by wetlands.

Cross-sectoral and ecosystem-based approaches to wetland management—such as river, lake, or aquifer basin-scale management and integrated coastal zone management—that consider the trade-offs between different wetland ecosystem services are more likely to ensure sustainable development than many existing sectoral approaches. These approaches are critical in designing actions in support of the Millennium Development Goals.

Many responses designed with a primary focus on wetlands and water resources will not be sustainable or sufficient unless other indirect and direct drivers of change are addressed. These include actions to eliminate production subsidies, sustainably intensify agriculture, slow climate change, slow nutrient loading, correct market failures, encourage stakeholder participation, and increase transparency and accountability of government and private-sector decision-making.

Major policy decisions in coming decades will need to address trade-offs among current uses of wetland resources and between current and future uses. Particularly important trade-offs involve those between agricultural production and water quality, land use and biodiversity, water use and aquatic biodiversity, and current water use for irrigation and future agricultural production.

Removing existing pressures on wetlands and improving their resiliency is the most effective method of coping with adverse effects of climate change. Conserving, maintaining, or rehabilitating wetland ecosystems can be a viable element of an overall climate change mitigation strategy.
