Data on macroinvertebrates of selected reference sites were compiled from a long-term monitoring programme carried out in the Mediterranean Catalan Basins (NE Spain) that permitted analysis for nine years, from 1996 to 2004, using a homogeneous data collection procedure. This study aims to analyse the differences in composition and structure of macroinvertebrate communities at family level in five Mediterranean river types, and the values of biological quality metrics (IBMWP and IASPT indices, taxon richness and EPT) in reference conditions. Also differences between seasons (spring vs. summer) and between dry and wet periods were analysed. The dry and wet periods were determined using the Standardised Precipitation Index (SPI). A total of 29 reference sites were selected out of 184 sampling sites analysed, and 171 reference samples were available (from 1996 to 2004), of which 88 were sampled in dry periods, whereas 83 correspond to wet periods. Differences on community composition at family level were appreciated, clustering the rivers in three different groups: (1) rivers with a continuous flow regime located in siliceous zones; (2) rivers with a continuous flow regime located in calcareous zones; and (3) temporary rivers regardless of geology. Moreover, our results explain that the characteristics of hydrological periods (dry and wet) characterize the differences between communities better than just the season. The analysis of four biological quality metrics reveals clear differences between values obtained from dry and wet periods concerning taxon richness, EPT values and IBMWP biological indices, whereas the IASPT index does not show significant differences. The median taxonomic richness in wet periods is 32 macroinvertebrate families per sample while in dry periods this value falls to 22. Reference values of IBMWP index, the total number of taxa, and EPT metric are different between dry and wet periods in spring samples, while these differences are not relevant for IASPT index except for temporary streams. Hydrological specific conditions should additionally be considered in order to better calculate biological reference conditions, and to properly apply biological quality metrics used to establish the ecological status in Mediterranean rivers, especially in temporary ones. The use of the dry–wet period classification according to the climate characteristic results is a more accurate application of the Water Framework Directive in Mediterranean rivers. Implications of future climate change should be also considered from our results.