PROTECTION OF THE UNDERGROUND KARST - CASES FROM SLOVENIA AND CROATIA

FOREWORD:

In this publication we have attempted to collect together part of the work carried out over the last few decades by Slovene and Croatian researchers in the field of karst underground protection. The range of topics is by no means all-encompassing, but it does represent a varied selection of subjects from the field of karst underground protection in Slovenia and Croatia. Our aim has been to bring together a representative selection of existing knowledge, to evaluate it and compare it with the findings of other research, and to present the contents in an accessible manner to the broad circle of people who are indirectly involved in karst underground protection. By combing findings from the fields of speleology, hydrology and biospeleology in a single publication, we have endeavoured to go beyond the increasingly rigid division into individual fields of expertise and present the different aspects using a common denominator – that of karst underground protection.

The karst underground is both the habitat of animals that live underground and an important source of drinking water. Caves contain important information on the palaeogeographic development of the underground and the surface, and also on climate change, and are an important economic category in the sense that some are used as show caves. At the same time they are usually extremely vulnerable, which greatly increases the need for strict protection, something that is frequently a secondary or even principal objective of the researchers who are directly involved with caves.

This publication is also the result of work on a cross-border project involving Slovenia and Croatia entitled Karst Underground Protection. Within the scope of this project, researchers from the Karst Research Institute at the Scientific Research Centre of the Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts, in conjunction with our Croatian partners (the Istrian Region and Natura Histrica), have combined educational activity (the "Classical Karst" International Karstological School in 2010 and 2011) and research (cross-border speleobiological research in Istria), upgraded and computerised the register of caves in the Istrian Region of Croatia, published our findings in local media and specialist circles, and planned the establishment of a network of institutions involved in karst protection in the project area. One direct result of the project in the karst underground has been the cleanup of 12 caves in Croatia and Slovenia by Slovene and Croatian cavers and refurbishment of once elementary school Lanišće (Municipality of Lanišće, Croatia) into "Speleo center". A significant part of the funding has been provided by the IPA Operational Programme Slovenia-Croatia 2007–2013 and a contribution has also been made by the Republic of Slovenia and the Scientific Research Centre of the Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts.
