Why Should We Care About Temporary Waterways?

Intermittently flowing streams and rivers should be recognized, afforded protection, and better managed.

A proposed ruling by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), aimed at clarifying which bodies of water that flow intermittently are protected under law, has provoked conflict between developers and environmental advocates. Some argue that temporary streams and rivers, defined as waterways that cease to flow at some points in space and time along their course, are essential to the integrity of entire river networks. Others argue that full protection will be too costly. Similar concerns extend far beyond the United States. Debate over how to treat temporary waterways in water-policy frameworks is ongoing, particularly because some large permanent rivers are shifting to temporary because of climate change and extraction of water. Even without human-induced changes, flow intermittency is part of the natural hydrology for streams and rivers globally.

We stress here the importance of policies to protect intermittently flowing streams and rivers and outline information needs that are critical to implementation of those policies. Failure to recognize, understand, and manage temporary waterways leads to serious degradation of aquatic ecosystems accompanied by negative impacts to the societies that depend upon them.

Waterways that are naturally temporary support high biodiversity and important ecosystem processes and provide valuable goods and services. They are critical conduits for water, energy, material, and organisms even when surface water is not present. Shallow subsurface flows may connect dry parts of a stream or river to downstream sections that have permanent flows, are often critical for the supply of water in permanent downstream parts of a river basin, and support diverse hyporheic biota.

Temporary waterways are also important conduits for lateral exchanges, as they move nutrients and organisms back and forth between the channel and the floodplain or riparian vegetation region because of changes in flow. These exchanges are critical to maintenance of riparian and floodplain ecosystems and, in some arid regions, support the majority of riparian vegetation. Riparian vegetation, as well as vegetation that grows in dry sections of temporary river channels, provides essential wildlife habitat, forage for livestock, and wood and other ecosystem services for local people. Several fish species maintain healthy populations in temporary waterways; some species exhibit higher survival and reach larger sizes if they use temporary streams during early life stages.

Temporary waterways are critical hydrologically, ecologically, and socially, and their number is expected to increase in many regions over the next several decades. Policies to protect them must recognize that flow intermittency per se is not necessarily a stressor but a natural component of the flow regime of many waterways.
